# Implementing CARE Principles for Indigenous Data

## Introduction
[Local Contexts](https://localcontexts.org/) was founded to support Indigenous data sovereignty and cultural authority. Core to Local Contexts are [Indigenous data sovereignty](https://nni.arizona.edu/our-work/research-policy-analysis/indigenous-data-sovereignty-governance), the [CARE Principles for Indigenous Data Governance](https://www.gida-global.org/care), and ethical and reciprocal partnerships.

Local Contexts is focused on increasing Indigenous involvement in data governance through the integration of Indigenous values into data systems. Local Contexts offers digital strategies for Indigenous communities, institutions, and researchers through the Traditional Knowledge (TK) & Biocultural (BC) Labels and Notices. Together they function as a practical mechanism to advance aspirations for Indigenous data sovereignty and Indigenous innovation.

In an increasingly complex legal, social, and cultural environment, the TK and BC Labels offer Indigenous communities a tool to add cultural and historical context and cultural authority to cultural heritage content in their own local digital heritage archives as well as in digital archives, libraries, museums, and other digital repositories globally.

The primary objectives of Local Contexts are to enhance and legitimize locally based decision-making and Indigenous governance frameworks for determining ownership, access, and culturally appropriate conditions for sharing historical, contemporary, and future collections of cultural heritage and Indigenous data. Local Contexts is focused on increasing Indigenous involvement in data governance through the integration of Indigenous values into data systems. Local Contexts offers digital strategies for Indigenous communities, cultural institutions and researchers through the Labels and Notices. Together they function as a practical mechanism to advance aspirations for Indigenous data sovereignty and Indigenous innovation.

## About
Local Contexts developed the Traditional Knowledge (TK) and Biocultural (BC) Labels that provide Indigenous data governance guidance. Indigenous and local communities can reinforce rights with the Labels. Local Contexts developed the Engagement, Disclosure, and Collections Care Notices as a strategy for institutions, organizations, and researchers to disclose Indigenous interests and rights. The connection between Notices and Labels are represented by the creation of Local Contexts Projects. Future initiatives should follow the mapping guidelines set here.

The Labels and Notices are extra-legal, educational strategies focused on provenance, protocols, and permissions that connect people and places to knowledge and data. Together, the Labels and Notices function to advance aspirations for Indigenous data sovereignty and Indigenous innovation.

## Label or Notice Verification
When displaying Local Contexts Labels or Notices, the Label or Notice Icon should always be displayed prominently on public-facing websites, digital collection pages, publications, etc. Ideally the Notice and Label title, Icon and text should all be visible. If it is not possible to display all three, they must be easily accessible via a modal or hyperlink. Review our [Traditional Knowledge/Biocultural Labels](https://localcontexts.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/08/TK-and-BC-Labels-Usage-and-Style-Guide.pdf) or [Engagement and Disclosure  Notices](https://localcontexts.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/08/Engagement-and-Disclosure-Notices-Usage-and-Style-Guide.pdf) usage guides for more information.

The Project ID or the Project URL should always be displayed with the Labels or Notices as a way to link back to the original record. This offers a connection back to the original Project in case there are issues with the metadata such as outdated or conflicting information. By linking back to the Project page, the Label or Notice information can be verified by users.